about is something that I call either
focusers teacher or storyteller as
teacher and this just popped out at me
one day I think almost that we tried to
teach people how to listen but what it
really involves is I'm a person telling
a story and I want to be listened to and
if I want to be listened to I want to be
listened to in a certain way I want to
be listened to with empathy and
compassion and I know how that feels but
only I know how that feels
and so it occurred to me gosh who better
than the person who's telling the story
it's there to teach you how to listen
everyone needs to be listened to in a
quite unique way now that I've
discovered there is not one masked or
one general way of listening you can't
teach a person listening 101 this is
what you do it just doesn't work that
way it's a very individual thing and so
it became very apparent to me that the
person who could best teach someone how
to listen to them was a person telling
this story and from there we've
developed some strategies to help now
the first thing is I'm being listened to
you're my listener you hold up a
reflection to me I take that reflection
in and I resonate it I see does it fit
is it right where I am does it capture
it and it might be dead-on in which case
I go on with my story more unfold it
might be a little bit off it might be
that I I did say all that but that isn't
really doesn't resonate it's not right
where I am so then I come out with
something else or it might be that the
person maybe got back my words but I
didn't get that they got the feeling of
it and I can give feedback something to
the effect of yes that's what I just
said but I don't it doesn't feel like
you've got how heavy that is how hard
that is for me to carry and I just want
you to know that's a really hard place
I'm in so here I've given my list or
some feedback the listener will take
that in and respond accordingly
maybe I simply need more time
need a response just then and I'll just
say could you just stay here with me a
moment I need a little bit of quiet a
little silence here to see where I am
it's this continual feedback loop I'm
teaching by resonating the reflection I
put that back to the listener I give the
listener feedback I'm teaching that
listener how to listen and Pathak alee
and compassionately to me and the exact
way I will feel listen to it seems so
simple and really the more I think about
it the easier is more simple it is it's
just that we didn't have an edge on that
we didn't quite understand that key
piece about the storyteller being the
best teacher we would like to go into
that a little bit more and demonstrate
it but can you maybe say a little bit
more about that yeah I just what I
wanted to add that it's a very
empowering process you would be amazed
at when we give workshops and we
introduce the focus or as teacher and
explain what that is there's no longer
the nervousness about listening it's
like the person can then clear a space
and they can be there present to the
other knowing that the talker or the
focuser is going to help them listen the
way they need to be listened to there's
no guessing guessing game so it's a very
empowering process and people volunteer
to listen they're not frightened about
listening anymore so I feel that has
been a real step forward in teaching
listening the emphasis used to be on the
listener now the emphasis is on the
focuser or the speaker to keep you know
so it's it's empowering for both people
yeah as you say that I remember my early
attempts at listening and how nervous I
was and when I was learning especially
at the Institute and I had an observer
and you know they were writing down
things as I was listening and I and I
knew it wasn't all Janet just made a
brilliant reflection I think there was
some problem there and you know it does
it makes you very tense I realized with
this storytellers teacher or focusers
teacher what a partnership it is this
what am a wonderful way of helping each
other there's a
we're working together here to to get
this thing really understood so that you
really feel and passively heard no that
was I think personally a big step
forward I think another part of it is we
want all our teaching to be experiential
so what is more experiential than
getting direct feedback from the speaker
so that right then and there in the
moment I as the listener can say also it
wasn't like that it's more like this
what value is there to my taking notes
and telling the person after it's over
you know it doesn't help them to so it's
it's a very experiential way of teaching
the listening yeah yeah that is an
important point because if my feedback
comes afterwards it can't anymore right
effect the interaction like you know the
quality of the moment right yes
you